[birds chirping]
- [insects trilling]
- [chirping continues]
[dog barking in distance]
[sheep bleating]
[indistinct background chatter]
[Rafelet and Maribel exclaim]
What is it? Wow. look at the lobster!
Did you wet yourself?
- [Rafelet babbles]
- All right.
- [Sebastián] Have you told them?
- [Rafa] No. not yet.
I'd better tell them.
That you're retiring?
I should.
[Rafelet] Hey papa!
But is that…
now or will you go there
to play and all that?
[Rafa] Hm.
Ready?
Whoa ho ho!
Grandma's very good at this!
[Maribel] Grandma's very good.
[Sebastián] Hey. she's a champion!
- [Rafelet] Papa!
- [Sebastián] Wait. hold on.
[Rafa] I think I have to retire.
After Roland-Garros.
What will you do?
Will you play the tournament?
I think that'll be difficult. Mom.
So. don't tell anyone.
that goes without saying.
No. I mean. no one. okay?
Well. we have to. I mean…
accept reality…
in the end.
I think we've stretched the party…
long enough.
More than you thought. am I right?
Yeah.
[Ana María] Are you feeling okay?
[scoffs] I feel how I feel.
What can I say?
[ball hitting racket]
[Rafa grunts]
[grunts]
[Rafa] Damn the fucking net.
I hate that fucking net. seriously.
I've never missed that in my life.
Never. Normally.
I don't even have to go back to it.
He's playing well
and. suddenly. he does two shitty shots.
Shit. he goes into this…
spiral.
There's just no way out.
Why do you move so slow. man?
Fuck.
Stop complaining.
- 'Cause in the end…
- [Rafa] That doesn't help me.
Calm down.
You get into this… and you can't get out.
I know it's not easy to enjoy. but try.
In Paris it has to be like that.
no exceptions. but you should start now.
You don't know how many training sessions
like this you'll have left.
Hell. in the end. that's what's cool.
Maybe in four or five years.
you look back…
and shit.
you'd like to go back to that moment
because you didn't enjoy it. you know?
And those moments.
well. they don't come back.
[serene and expectant music playing]
[commentator 1] Rafa Nadal hasn't set foot
on the center court at Roland-Garros
in 715 days.
[commentator 2]
This is his 19th appearance here.
The first one. when he was an 18-year-old.
back in 2005.
[crowd cheering]
[commentator 3]
This is the most special marriage
in the history of world sports.
that of Rafa Nadal
and the court where he has won 14 times…
and where we hope it won't be the last.
[fans screaming]
[music builds]
[Rafa] Don't miss this one!
- Ugh.
- [Moyá] Okay. hang in there. Rafa.
Yeah.
[music fades]
[Moyá] In Rafa's career. there are times
when he is very hard on himself.
In these moments.
you try to be his friend. not his coach.
There have been some complicated
and difficult years.
And even though I wasn't on his team.
I was still aware
of what he was going through.
[crowd cheering]
[Rafa] Worst year: 2015.
It was the first time in my career
that I played the clay court season
without winning a single tournament.
I had less energy.
less ability to concentrate…
Something. obviously.
was not working properly.
[dynamic pulsing music playing]
[Rafa] I'd go out on the court thinking.
"Let's see what happens today."
- [fan 1] Rafa!
- [fan 2] Rafa. come on!
[fan 3] Come on. Rafa!
[María] He has always lived with anxiety.
but not as much as during that time.
I remember he wasn't able to stay focused.
When he threw the ball.
he couldn't see it.
[Rafa] I had no control.
[commentator] That's out!
[commentator 2] It's the shot he needs
to get into this match.
[Rafa] I thought.
"I'm making a fool of myself here."
- [commentator 2] Missed it.
- [commentator 3] Another error.
And that match is a mirror of…
what my day-to-day life
has been like for months.
- [line] Fault!
- [umpire] Game. set. and match. Djokovic!
[commentator 3] The king of clay
has been dethroned at Roland-Garros.
His dominance has come to an end.
He's out at the quarterfinal stage.
[commentator 4] After 70 victories
and two losses on the clay of Paris.
Nadal has fallen to tenth place
in the ATP rankings.
[music stops]
[Rafa] Around that time. I almost stopped
playing tennis for a season.
I showed up tired from my daily routine.
But…
Toni wasn't very…
let's say he wasn't
a big fan of breaks.
[Rafa] Actually. he thought
that the best way to recover
was to carry on playing tennis.
[smooth pulsing music playing]
I always say. "I've never seen
anyone improve by resting."
Because when I lose.
I think I must keep on training.
He's throwing it down.
- [interviewer] Was it a tough session?
- This is much harder than playing.
This way. you make sure that.
when you get to the court.
you're already in shape.
Or not.
- [director] Ready?
- [cameraman] Yes.
[Joan] I talked to Toni.
And I told him he had to rest more.
He had to manage his training load better…
But I guess Toni didn't like that.
All I said was.
"We need to work more."
[Joan] He always thought that
anything that meant protecting Rafael was
weakening him as a competitor.
I was more worried about the mental part
because everything is connected.
[María] In his daily life.
it affected him.
not being able
to get out of that state of anxiety.
I remember that. at the time.
he couldn't be without water.
We couldn't go on a car ride
if he didn't have water.
He'd feel like he was suffocating.
[Rafa] If I didn't have
a bottle of water in my hand.
I couldn't swallow my saliva.
My throat would go dry…
[swallows with difficulty]
…and I would choke on my own saliva.
[crowd cheering]
[Rafa] I knew it was anxiety.
but I couldn't find a solution.
[commentator] That's the shot
that he can't clear the net with.
[Rafa] I tried to make myself believe
that things were getting better.
but no. not really…
I couldn't do it.
[commentator 2]
You could make a compelling argument
that Rafa Nadal
is not the same player anymore.
and never will be.
[adverse music playing]
If you have anxiety. you have anxiety.
I didn't think too much of it.
I thought. "Well.
if we work. we'll make it out of this."
[commentator 3] Rafael Nadal
denied once again the quarter-finals.
And for Nadal. disappointment.
That's a long walk down that hall
where he has been triumphant before.
[Rafa] Those two years were.
I'd say. the most difficult of my career.
After that. I had to go…
to see…
a psychiatrist.
He said that it was probably due
to all these years of high demand
and living constantly
with the feeling of stress.
My professional relationship with Toni.
I mean. it wasn't bad.
But maybe I needed
for my mind to hear a different message.
[reflective music playing]
[Rafa] So. it was decided
that adding another person
onto the team was necessary.
[dynamic synth music playing]
[Rafa] My father called Toni.
I wouldn't have been able
to do it on my own. Mm.
[speaking Spanish]
[Rafa in English]
It was emotionally tough for me.
A very difficult decision.
Because I thought that…
I… I had a gut feeling
that bringing someone else
into the team would hurt Toni.
[Sebastián]
You've been doing more of the same
and maybe there comes a time
when you need to try something else.
Toni is my brother. but. uh…
to me. my son comes first.
Maybe Toni wasn't really happy about it.
but we understood
that it would benefit Rafa.
[Rafa] And that's when.
well. the idea was brought up
of bringing Carlos on board.
[music stops]
[inspirational music playing]
[crowd cheering]
[Rafa] When I was a kid.
Carlos was someone I admired very much.
WE ARE WITH YOU CARLOS
Carlos is the first number 1
in the history of Spain.
and he's from Mallorca.
[interviewer] When you see Carlos Moyá.
what do you think?
[in Spanish] That I'd like to be like him.
[Rafa in English] I joined
the professional tour at a very young age.
The only person I really knew was Carlos.
[photographer] Hold each other's hands?
- There. Like that.
- [shutter clicking]
I always had the feeling
that Carlos wanted the best for me.
Are you playing in this tournament?
[Moyá] He was a good guy. humble. quiet.
I always tried to help him.
to give him advice if he asked.
- This thing moves up.
- Yeah?
Depending on how I throw it.
it slides up when I'm playing.
You have to put that red tape there.
[applause]
[Moyá] I saw that he was a player
capable of beating anyone on the circuit.
[commentator] We're looking
at the fourth-best player in the world
and he is playing a 16-year-old
and getting outhit.
- [line] Out.
- [commentator 2] And he's done it!
What a sensational moment this is.
[Moyá] It was clear
that he was going to surpass me.
But I never tried
to hold him back or pull him down.
Hey. you have to go to the left!
Where's he going?
Hey. it's to the left!
[Rafa] This dude is a son of a bitch!
[both laughing]
[no audible dialogue]
But when he decided
that I should join the team.
I was a bit surprised.
[Rafa] I went to dinner with him in Palma.
We talked for three hours
about what he thought I needed.
and what he thought he could contribute.
[Moyá] He hadn't won
a Grand Slam in two years.
I told him.
"I think you can win Grand Slams again.
and you can be number one again."
So I left the meeting convinced that…
it was a good decision
for him to join the team.
[hopeful music playing]
[Rafa] Carlos joined the team
at the end of the year.
The plan was for Carlos and Toni
to work as a team.
[Toni] In the end. I understand that if…
the results aren't good enough and…
you want change.
well. I think that a change can be good.
[Moyá] He was already 30 when I joined.
Now he had to forget
what had worked for him in the past.
We changed the training system a little.
[Rafa] He thought that
we needed to train for less time.
but in a more specific way.
on the elements that I needed.
[Moyá] We were always told
that Rafa needed to play more matches
to gain confidence.
But he is so good that I didn't think
he needed so many matches. you know?
He can use the first Grand Slam matches
to get into the rhythm.
and gain confidence.
The first tournament we go to
is the Australian Open.
[commentator 1]
"I'm happy to return to the competition."
said Rafa Nadal.
[commentator 2] It's difficult for Rafa.
He's not gonna get rid of Uncle Toni.
but this is a decision that Rafa wanted.
He wanted Carlos there.
In terms of the press
or people's opinions.
Carlos is gaining the leading role.
Very strong. mentally very strong.
believing in himself.
which is the Rafa we wanted to see.
[resilient music playing]
In 2017. from the very first moment.
we could see
that something was coming back.
[crowd cheering]
[Ángel] I've never seen anyone.
absolutely no one.
have as much confidence in Rafa
as Charlie Moyá.
- [crowd cheering]
- [no audible dialogue]
Many times. before the matches.
I would say to him.
"Remember who you are."
"Make your opponent see
who he's playing against."
"What you've done is already incredible."
"Make him see that history."
[commentator 1] The tenth is in the bag!
[commentator 2] The king of clay
has reclaimed his throne.
From this moment on.
I think his perspective changes.
[emotional music playing]
[Maymó] A thought crosses his mind.
"I'm Rafa Nadal again.
the one I've been all these years."
Hold it there.
Now push harder. okay?
Push harder. Come on.
[cheering rises]
[cheering grows louder]
[commentator 3] Truly amazing.
Six thousand people
watching Rafa Nadal's training.
[commentator 4] I've got goosebumps.
[fans] Rafa! Rafa! Rafa! Rafa!
[music builds]
[Moyá] Stay positive and find a way.
Because you will find it.
[applause]
[Gustavo]
You come to a court just to train
and the whole court gets fired up. huh?
They chant your name.
Beautiful. right?
How the hell is this guy
going to want to stop playing tennis?
- Well. yeah.
- After this.
[Moyá] Come on. win the point. Rafael.
Well played set!
Come on. that's it. let's go.
- Very good. man.
- Good quality. Good.
[crowd cheering]
[commentator 5]
Rafa is training very well.
He's still doing
three-hour sessions a day.
he's won every set he's played…
[Rafa and María exclaim and laugh]
- Kiss. Come.
- Kiss. kiss. kiss. kiss.
- Go with Daddy?
- Give Daddy a hug.
Give Daddy a hug. He's very sweaty.
No. give Daddy a hug. Yeah. a hug.
[interviewer] Have you decided
whether this will be
your final French Open?
Because everybody is assuming it will be.
but I don't know
if you've decided that for sure.
Maybe the last one.
maybe not. but…
[laughter]
But let's explore.
- [laughing]
- [clapping]
[clapping continues in distance]
[Rafa] The logical thing
is for me to retire. but…
I'd feel really sad
if I didn't really give it a try.
"Look. my body has evolved
in a positive way these last few weeks."
"The family is happy.
I'm happy playing. I'm having fun."
"But to say that
this will be my last Roland-Garros.
I can't be 100% certain."
I can perform. you know?
[somber music playing]
[presenter] Hello! Hello. everyone.
Thank you. and welcome to Roland-Garros.
here in this iconic venue
that will host the placements
for the main draw.
[tense pulsing music playing]
[commentator] A very important draw.
And right from the first match.
he could play against
any player in the world.
The draw is not complete.
We still need the seeded players.
But it's already very interesting.
- Totty. totty…
- Totty. totty? I love the "Totty. totty."
[commentator 2] I think Rafa's gonna get
to the quarters. What if he plays Alcaraz?
You don't know who he's going to play.
[in French] Now the seeded players
number three and four. Marie-Jo.
[suspenseful music playing]
- [in English] Number 4.
- [announcer] Alexander Zverev.
[crowd gasping and murmuring]
[indistinct chatter and laughter]
[commentator] The news of the day.
which is the bad luck that Rafa Nadal
has had in the Roland-Garros draw.
His first match will be against Zverev.
number 4 in the world.
It's a nice draw?
- It is what it is.
- [Marc] What?
- [Jordi ironically] Easy draw. right?
- Easy draw.
Zverev.
- [Marc] Okay. First game?
- Sure. The first.
[Marc] All right.
[Maymó] Well. obviously.
it's not what you want.
[soft expectant music playing]
- [Sebastián] How is he handling it?
- [Marc] Good.
Actually. he said.
"I came to win the tournament."
[fans] Rafael! Rafa!
- You are the best player. We love you.
- Rafa!
- I love you.
- We love you so much in France.
[indistinct chatter]
[commentator 6] Isn't it nice
to see Nadal. the real Nadal.
back out there?
[commentator 7] I think Nadal can fight
to be number one in the world again.
[Rafa] Bringing Carlos into the team.
I think it was good at the beginning.
[music stops]
I remember we were training in Manacor.
and Toni was at a conference abroad.
Someone checked their phone…
and said that Toni had made a statement.
[commentator 8] Toni Nadal will no longer
be coaching Rafael Nadal next season.
[Rafa] And the press said that…
he was no longer working with me.
That this was his last year. Well…
That's how we found out.
Rafa didn't know. I didn't know.
He didn't say anything to anyone.
We found out through the press.
[dramatic melancholic music playing]
[Rafa] It wasn't what I was looking for
when I brought Carlos into the team.
To me. it wasn't Carlos in. Toni out.
[commentator] He's going to be
parting company with his Uncle Toni.
who's coached him for how many years?
[commentators] 27 or 28 years.
I think that the most natural thing
would have been for him to tell us
before the press.
But. he must have had his reasons.
Nothing I can do about it.
I like to feel useful in life.
I don't like being somewhere
where. in the end. I feel…
"Well. I can't really contribute much."
That's why I made the decision to leave.
[interviewer]
That must have been a shock for him?
I don't think so.
- No?
- No.
[Rafa] I felt…
a bit shocked. of course.
[indistinct]
[Rafa] Toni was my uncle. And…
the influence he had on me was
greater than any other person
had ever had.
In a way. I was scared
of how I was going to react without Toni.
[melancholic music continues]
[clamor and applause]
[Rafa] In 2017. I won the US Open.
We finished the year as number one.
[optimistic music playing]
[Maymó] I think he evolved
and changed his perception of himself.
And I think that's the reason
for his later success.
after he turned 30.
I think that. in some way.
his belief in himself
gives him an extra boost.
[line] Fault!
[umpire] Game. set. and match. Nadal.
[commentator] Seventeen Grand Slams now.
[Rafa]
I lived the last years of my career.
I'd say. with a little more
of a feeling of freedom.
[applause]
[Rafa] And less tension than with Toni.
[Maymó] He learned to relax a little.
[music fades]
…to have a day-to-day life
where he could enjoy himself.
[indistinct background chatter]
He was more mature.
By 30. you know who you are.
You stop being a kid. so to speak.
[reporters clamoring]
[María] He lived with his parents until…
2018. I think.
And he would have lived
with his parents much longer.
But…
[María and interviewer laugh]
In fact. it was me who suggested
we live together. and he was like…
"Why?"
I was scared of…
of that decision.
But once it happened.
it was great.
She's the woman
I wanted to start a family with.
And without a doubt.
her support was very important to me.
I was happy
during those years of my career.
[clamoring]
I really enjoyed seeing myself
competing at the highest level.
[inspirational music playing]
[commentator 1]
Rafa Nadal. he's got 18 in total.
[commentator 2] Wimbledon number five
for the Serbian superstar.
[commentator 3] Novak Djokovic's got 16.
Roger Federer with 20.
[commentator 4]
It's remarkable that we see them
produce the tennis that they do.
[Wertheim] They're playing in their prime.
they're all playing on every surface.
they're all winning all four majors…
You say. "Boy. how lucky we are."
And then you say.
"Well. no. it's not in a vacuum."
The one reason they're staying out there
is because they were pushing each other.
"Well. shit. this guy's
still winning multiple majors a year
when he's closer
to age 40 than he is to 30."
Like. "Why not me?"
- [umpire] Three sets to two.
- [cheering]
[commentator 1] He's the US Open champion!
[commentator 2] For the first time.
the difference between
Nadal and Federer. just one.
[commentator 3] They're on their feet.
Rafael Nadal serving
for a 13th Roland-Garros title
and a 20th Grand Slam title.
[umpire] Game. set. and match. Nadal.
[commentator 3] In 2020.
Rafael Nadal makes it 20.
Defeats his great rival. Novak Djokovic.
[cheering erupts]
[commentator]
It's the miracle in Melbourne.
An improbable comeback.
Twenty-one major titles.
The greatest player of all time.
[Rafa] I was having
an incredibly good feeling.
I wanted to do
everything I could to keep it going.
But after the Australian Open final.
my body wasn't okay.
I wasn't feeling great.
[music fades]
[indistinct chatter]
[reporter] Hey. wait. Wait. wait…
[woman] That leg will get better?
- How are you. Rafa?
- Rafa. how's it going?
I don't know.
we'll know in a few days. I don't…
- [reporter] Feeling good about it?
- I don't feel anything.
[all laugh]
[woman] Thank you. Rafa.
[Ruiz-Cotorro] The truth is
that we are all very surprised
that he has been able
to play as long as he has.
That foot has been degenerating
over the years.
That's why there came a moment
when that foot said.
"I can't take it anymore."
[melancholic music playing]
[María] Those were complicated months.
[commentator 1] Oh. he's got it!
[commentator 2]
The apprentice finally beats the master.
[María] He played in Madrid
and lost.
He played in Rome
[commentator] His foot issue
seems like it's taken a toll on him.
[María] So he went
to Roland-Garros with many doubts.
[presenter] Twenty-one Grand Slams.
thirteen Roland Garros titles.
the Spaniard Rafael Nadal!
[Rafa] I was in constant pain.
I think that for all of us.
we were at a point
where it seemed like my career was…
over.
It was very clear
his body couldn't take it anymore.
[commentator] For once.
not getting the drop shot right. Nadal.
And well mopped up by Jordan Thompson.
[María] He played the first match in pain.
but. somehow. he won.
[crowd cheering]
[Ruiz-Cotorro] Before the match.
I gave him a little anesthesia to play.
But then he told me.
"Listen. I really don't know
how we're going to be able to…
to finish this tournament."
"I'm in pain."
The reality now was that the foot
no longer responded to those treatments.
[Rafa] When I left the match. my father…
had to carry me like this.
on his shoulders. to the room.
I was in a lot of pain.
I didn't sleep at all.
Not even for a minute.
And I was thinking. nonstop thinking.
First thing in the morning.
I called Ángel.
I asked him.
"Is there any way
to numb the sensory nerve
without affecting the motor nerve?"
And he said. "Yes. we can give it a try."
But from a medical point of view.
this is as far as we go.
Because you can tear the tendon.
[Rafa] They injected me here. here. here.
In all the nerves that affected
this whole superficial area of the foot.
I didn't know if it would really work.
but I went to play.
[crowd cheering]
[commentator 1]
This is the one we were waiting for.
And the moment has now arrived.
The two of them are
up against each other for the 59th time.
[Clarey] You knew he was doing
extreme measures to get himself to play.
It turned out he was feeling nothing.
His foot was numb.
Quite a risky thing. isn't it?
To have no sensation.
If your foot starts to go
the wrong direction. you won't even know.
[resolute music playing]
Come on!
He knows that the pain is there.
But it was clear to him
that if I gave him enough
to be able to compete.
he was going to compete to the death.
and he did.
[cheering erupts]
With Rafa. you know
that every match is "live or die."
The level of the tenacity
brought out to the court.
That match was unbelievable.
[commentator 2]
And he's done it! Rafa Nadal!
He has made it
to the Roland Garros semi-finals.
He doesn't feel his foot
and he's winning this?
I mean. what are you gonna tell me next?
He's gonna play blindfolded.
and he's gonna win it also?
It's like. come on!
[commentator 3] Rafa is on the verge
of clinching that 14th title.
here at Roland Garros.
[inspirational resolute music playing]
Rafa has given absolutely everything.
He has gifted us everything he had.
[crowd exclaims]
[Ángel] I'm convinced that Rafa
went out on that court that day
thinking that it might be
his last tennis match.
Because otherwise.
I don't see it as physically possible.
[commentator 4]
The greatest becomes even greater.
[commentator 2] The man
who makes miracles on a daily basis
has just written another page.
I don't know if it was a miracle.
but close.
[Clarey] He'd been through a lot
just to get there.
But I have to be honest.
I did have his retirement story written.
like a lot of us did.
And I had it on my computer.
And as he came to the microphone.
the crowd was expecting something.
and I know all the journalists were.
We were all kind of ready to…
[smacks lips]
…hit "send" on these stories.
I don't know what can happen
in the future.
but I'm gonna keep fighting
to try to keep going.
So. many thanks.
Thank you very much. everyone. Thank you.
"Delete."
Or "save for later." You know?
[applause]
[Clarey]That was a sign that we were
gonna go to some form of bitter end.
[interviewer]
Do you think you should have retired
after Roland-Garros in 2022?
Of course not.
Why?
I never wanted to stop.
I always wanted to keep going.
To me. it's very simple.
I'm exploring my limits.
[inspirational expectant music playing]
[Moyá] Zverev?
[Marc] Zverev is confident. we know that…
[Gustavo] Exactly.
that's what I'm telling you. right?
[Marc] Today will be a great day.
[fans clamoring]
- [man in Spanish] Thank you. Rafa!
- [man in English] Love you. Rafa!
[indistinct shouting]
[cracking]
[Marc] He hasn't complained?
- Right now?
- Physically.
No.
- Well. I don't know if that's good.
- Not physically or anything else.
[Marc] He seems calm.
[María] Let's go see Daddy.
Daddy.
- Daddy!
- [María] Daddy!
We can bring a racket. but only one.
[commentator 1] It's gray and very wet.
but we are gonna be shining
some fabulous tennis.
[commentator 2] If in a tournament
it is worth going out there
to give everything and die for it.
then it is Paris.
[commentator 3] The chances
of him winning are very small.
[commentator 4] Gonna be tough for Rafa.
He's put his body
through so much over the years.
[crowd cheering]
[announcer] And 14 at Roland-Garros.
2005. '06. '07. '08.
2010.
'11. '12. '13. '14. '17. '18. '19.
2020 and 2022.
Rafael Nadal!
[crowd cheering frantically]
NEVER RETIRE PLEASE
[commentator 4] You can never
write Rafael Nadal off in Paris.
Come on!
[commentator 5]
The roof is shut on Chatrier.
so it's going to be even more
of a cacophony of noise.
[music builds]
[groans]
That was clearly his nerves.
[commentator] What a start for Zverev.
[battle music playing]
[commentator] Rafael Nadal
hadn't dropped a set in practice.
He has dropped the opening set
when it really matters.
I can't believe it. man.
[Marc] It'll get better. you'll see.
Come on. Gus. have a little faith.
[Rafa] Despite everything
that has happened in my career.
all the times I've been out of action.
all the times it seemed
like my career was over.
always.
I've always kept the will to… to fight.
[Moyá] Come on. Confidence!
Come on!
Yes! Come on! That's it!
[commentator 2] Suddenly. some momentum.
Come on. focus. focus! Let's go!
Come on!
[commentator 2] What a hold that is.
Four brilliant points in a row for Nadal.
[music builds]
Now he sees it.
- Now he has faith.
- Yeah.
He doesn't change. man.
[commentator 2] There's another stunner!
We're going to see
a tie-breaker between these two.
[music turns expectant]
[commentator 2] Nadal steals the point!
[Moyá] Oh. no!
Come on! Let's go!
[commentator 2]
Nadal just never goes away. does he?
Yeah. again he read the play. Zverev.
He's on the ropes though. here. Nadal.
Second set point for the German.
[umpire] Two sets. love. Zverev.
[commentator 2]
Zverev now leads by two sets to love.
I wonder how much
he's got left in the tank.
[emotional music playing]
- He's tired now.
- Yeah. he's very tired.
[Rafa] I never thought
I'd be trying to play tennis
at the age of 37.
[applause]
[Rafa] I know I don't need
to prove anything to anyone.
Not even to myself.
But I can't help it.
This is my seal.
That's who I am.
[line] Out!
[umpire] Game. set. and match. Zverev.
[commentator 2] Perhaps the last dance
for Rafa Nadal at Roland-Garros
ends in defeat.
[applause]
Now the sun comes out!
[cheering]
[Moyá] The sun came out!
[announcer] Rafael Nadal!
[cheering continues in distance]
[commentator] Will he be back?
We're unsure.
But what a legacy he leaves behind.
Fourteen times a champion
here at Roland-Garros.
[emotional music continues]
[music fades]
[Rafa] What did Daddy do?
Do you know what Daddy did. Rafelet?
Wah. wah. wah…
Daddy went like this. Wah!
- [Rafelet murmurs]
- [Rafa quacks]
But anyways…
This record will be tough…
- [Marc] Tough to beat?
- Yeah.
I think it'll be harder. maybe I'm wrong.
but I think it'll be harder
to surpass this one than Djokovic's 24.
[Maymó] I bet.
[somber music playing]
[Rafa] You never know. right?
But if I had to bet money.
I think it'll take more time
for someone to surpass 14 Roland-Garros
than 24 Grand Slams.
[delicate music playing]
[Maymó] No. it's not hard.
What you see stand out is not hard.
It's soft. Touch. Look. do this.
See? You see it swollen.
but it's not hard. it's soft.
It's an alien. man.
[music fades]
He says he doesn't know
if it's a good idea
to play at the US Open.
I just don't see it.
- [Sebastián] Big balloons?
- Those are balls.
- [Rafelet] Papa.
- There they go.
[Rafa] It's very nice outside.
[María] It's really nice being here now.
[sentimental music playing]
[María] When he arrived
at Roland-Garros this year.
we thought he was going to say goodbye.
And then.
since he saw himself training well.
he started thinking about going further.
[indistinct chatter]
[María] But obviously.
deep down. I thought.
"How are we going to continue like this?"
[Maymó] I think he likes to suffer
with the purpose
of overcoming that suffering.
But at the end of his career.
I think the suffering
no longer led to overcoming it.
It was suffering
for the sake of suffering.
And that's what. I think.
finally burned out the flame.
- [ball hitting racket]
- [Rafa grunting]
[applause]
[commentator] It's Finals Day in Båstad.
It's been a fair few matches
where he's looked not quite himself.
looked almost down and out.
He's moving very slowly.
[suspenseful ethereal music playing]
[Clarey] I think he had
to go to the point where…
it got painful to see
what he was becoming.
He needs to feel the limitations.
See balls that he once would have reached
and whacked for winners
no longer be reachable.
And to see levels of play that.
for him. were once like breathing.
now become impossible.
[umpire] Game. set. and match. Borges.
[applause]
[Maymó] Well. after losing in Båstad.
Rafa wrote to us a few hours later.
[melancholic music playing]
[Maymó] The message says.
"Team…"
"I'm not really good at these things.
but today I really feel bad.
I'm shattered."
"Apologies for today to everyone."
"Honestly. I haven't been able
to find the energy to improve myself.
or at least try to."
"During the match. I decided to retire."
"Thank you all for everything."
"And although it doesn't make sense
to apologize at this point in my career.
I do it because it's what I feel."
"A big hug to everyone."
After the match.
he locked himself in the bathroom
and he was in bad shape.
[indistinct chatter]
[María] It's in his DNA to keep fighting.
But it was in Båstad that he…
he saw that he wasn't able to…
do that anymore.
[interviewer] What did he say
that made you feel. "It's over"?
Those words.
"I need to retire."
Not "I have."
Not "I want to."
"I need to retire."
[interviewer] Why? Just like that?
It was obvious.
He didn't recognize himself on the court.
At that moment.
he saw that he couldn't give any more.
[indistinct chatter]
[water gurgling softly]
[Rafa] In a way.
when you say. "I'm retiring…"
in the end. you're saying. "I surrender."
You stop being what you've been
practically all your life.
You go back to being just the person.
Hi. everyone. Um…
Well. I'm here to…
let you all know
something that I've been thinking about.
uh… for a long time.
And imagining what it would be like.
[applause]
[Rafa] I have decided
that the Davis Cup final
is going to be my last tournament
as a professional tennis player.
[crowd chanting] Rafa! Rafa!
Rafa! Rafa! Rafa!
[chanting continues]
[Rafa] I've never lost the hope
that things would get better.
as it had happened
many times throughout my career.
But not this time.
The question is…
"Why keep going?"
[indistinct chatter]
[announcer] Welcome to this ceremony
in honor of Rafael Nadal.
[cheering and whistling]
[Rafa] I would be very unhappy
if I thought I hadn't done everything
to fight until the end.
That has always been my biggest fear.
And now there is no fear… at all.
[crowd chanting] Rafa! Rafa!
Rafa! Rafa!
Thank you.
VICTORY BELONGS TO THE MOST TENACIOUS
It's hard to start with just one person.
but. Toni…
you are the reason I'm here.
Thank you for dedicating
a great part of your life
to wanting to be with me.
Training. talking. tricking me.
making me suffer. making me laugh.
and pushing me to the limit.
What we have experienced
has not always been easy.
but it has definitely been worth it.
[applause]
[emotional music playing]
[music builds]
[Rafa] I have achieved my goal.
which is to give my all…
and to retire in peace…
at ease with what my career has been.
[cheering]
ROLAND-GARROS
MEN'S SINGLES
[in Spanish] Okay.
[emotional music fades]
[somber victorious music playing]
[music fades]
[serene inspirational music playing]